YACAL wd01 (#77)
oasis-tcs/xacml-spec: acal-core-yaml-v1.0.md

# YAML Representation of ACAL (YACAL) Version 1.0

## Working Draft 01

## 23 March 2026

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### This version

- `acal-core-yaml-wd01-v1.0.md` (working draft source)

### Previous version

N/A

### Latest version

- `acal-core-yaml-wd01-v1.0.md` (current working draft)

### Technical Committee

OASIS eXtensible Access Control Markup Language (XACML) TC

### Chairs

- Bill Parducci (bill@parducci.net), Individual

### Secretaries

- Bill Parducci (bill@parducci.net), Individual

### Editors

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Bill Parducci (bill@parducci.net), Individual
```

The citation format would need to be updated accordingly.

YAML mapping
: A YAML node consisting of key-value pairs

YAML sequence
: A YAML node consisting of an ordered list of values

YAML scalar
: A YAML node consisting of a single value (string, integer, float,
  boolean, or null)

wrapper key
: A mapping key whose name identifies the type of the value it
  contains; used for type discrimination in polymorphic contexts

### 2.2 Abbreviations and Acronyms

This document uses the following abbreviations and acronyms:

**ACAL**

: Attribute-Centric Authorization Language

**YACAL**

: YAML Representation of ACAL

**YAML**

: YAML Ain't Markup Language [[YAML1.2](#yaml12)]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 3. Document Conventions

### 3.1 Key Words

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in [[RFC2119](#rfc2119)]
and [[RFC8174](#rfc8174)].

### 3.2 Typographic Conventions

YAML examples are presented in block style using code fences.  Property
names from the ACAL abstract model are rendered in `monospace`.

> References to ACAL abstract model types use the form *TypeName* in

Reviewer: The core spec uses `monospace` for type names. We should decide on the convention we want then use it consistently across the specifications.

Author: @cdanger ?

Reviewer 2: Yes, let's stick with `TypeName` (between backticks).

Reviewer: I'm not fussed either way, but for the ACAL core spec I took the view that anything that wasn't a regular word in the prose would get back ticks. That encompasses literal values, URIs, examples, schema fragments and type names. It also has the effect that anything that can appear in ACAL protocol messages and policies, or in the external artifacts like schema files and identifier lists, would always appear in a fixed-width courier font.

YACAL is a concrete representation format for ACAL.  Every construct in
the ACAL abstract model has a corresponding YACAL representation defined
in this specification.  The normative reference for semantics,
evaluation rules, and abstract conformance requirements is
[[ACAL-Core](#acal-core)].  This specification defines how ACAL abstract
model types are expressed in YAML.

### 4.2 Relationship to Peer Representations

YACAL is structurally aligned with the other ACAL concrete
representations.  The mapping from ACAL to YACAL follows the same broad
design patterns used across the concrete representations:

-   type discrimination through wrapper mapping keys
-   polymorphic types through mutually exclusive required keys
-   ordered collections through YAML sequences
-   implicit data types for primitive values

Each concrete representation is specified independently against the ACAL
abstract model.  Transformations between concrete representations, where
needed, belong in separate interoperability guidance and do not define
YACAL conformance or semantics.

### 4.3 Design Principles

The design of YACAL is guided by the following principles, in priority
order:

> 1.  **Conformance**: every YACAL document MUST be expressible as a

Reviewer: I don't understand what this is saying. ACAL doesn't have instances. YACAL, JACAL and XACML define the instances.

Author: It is trying to say that YACAL is an instance of ACAL that must be semantically equivalent.

Reviewer: Broadly speaking, the ACAL core defines the semantics, and the representations, such as YACAL, define the syntax. The Abstract even says "ACAL semantics are defined by ACAL-Core". So that implies YACAL does not define ACAL semantics (although it does duplicate some of them). The meaning of a YACAL instance is only determined by reference to the ACAL core so it has no meaning independent of the ACAL core that allows us to insist that it be semantically equivalent to the ACAL core.

And "ACAL instance" is a meaningless term,

Perhaps what this should be saying is: _every YACAL document MUST be conformant with the ACAL core_.
And perhaps that YACAL does not semantically extend the ACAL core.

I'm not sure design principles merit a "MUST" over a "must".

Author: I have made the requested change and pushed it here.

-   **Octal notation** for integers (to align with JSON integer type), i.e. any value matching the pattern `0o [0-7]+` is forbidden.

### 5.2 Document Structure

#### 5.2.1 Root Element

A YACAL document is a single YAML mapping with exactly one key at the
root level.  The key identifies the document type:

| Root Key | ACAL Type | Description |
|---|---|---|
| `Policy` | *PolicyType* | A single policy |
| `Bundle` | *BundleType* | A collection of policies, shared variables, and identifiers |
| `Request` | *RequestType* | An authorization decision request |
| `Response` | *ResponseType* | An authorization decision response |

Example:

```yaml
Policy:
  PolicyId: "urn:example:yacal:policy:my-first-policy"
  Version: "1.0"
  CombiningAlgId: deny-unless-permit
  CombinerInput:
    - Rule:
        Id: AllowRead
        Effect: Permit
```

#### 5.2.2 Property Names

All property names in YACAL use PascalCase, following the ACAL abstract
model property set as normalized for YAML presentation: `PolicyId`, `CombiningAlgId`,
`AttributeDesignator`, `MustBePresent`, etc.

Where an ACAL abstract property name is not already PascalCase, YACAL

> normalizes it to PascalCase.  For example, the ACAL property `isBag` is

Reviewer: Is there a reason why isBag isn't already PascalCase in the core spec? It seems like an obvious inconsistency.

Author: None that I can think of. Suggest we verify that PascalCase consistently. If we agree upon that I can update the YACAL doc and remove this rationalization.

Reviewer 2: No reason indeed, that's a typo in the Core. Actually it is spelled correctly a few times in the descriptive text, but not in the UML bit, my bad. I've just fixed it in the main branch: 320cdf3 .

Author: I have updated the YACAL doc in this branch so that it no longer has this clarification.

represented in YACAL as `IsBag`.

#### 5.2.3 Property Ordering

The ordering of keys within a YAML mapping is not significant for
YACAL semantics.  However, for readability and consistency, YACAL
documents SHOULD order properties in the same sequence as they appear
in the ACAL abstract model definition.

#### 5.2.4 Omitted Properties

> Optional properties that are absent from a YACAL document take the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An optional property that is absent from a YACAL document takes the default value defined by the ACAL abstract model, if one is defined.
```

Author: I added this to latest push.

represented as a YAML scalar.

YACAL relies on YAML 1.2 Core Schema resolution, but ACAL lexical and
value-space constraints remain normative.  Therefore, a YAML scalar is
not conformant merely because it is legal YAML; it MUST also satisfy the
constraints of the ACAL primitive type being represented.

#### 5.3.2 Primitive Types Mapped to Native YAML Scalars

The ACAL primitive types in the following table are represented using
native YAML scalar forms under the Core Schema:

| ACAL Type | YAML Form | Notes |
|---|---|---|
| `String` | YAML string scalar | Quote when required by [Section 5.1.3](#513-string-quoting) |
| `Boolean` | YAML boolean scalar | MUST use `true` or `false` |
| `Integer` | YAML integer scalar | MUST resolve as integer under the Core Schema |
| `NonNegativeInteger` | YAML integer scalar | MUST resolve as integer and be greater than or equal to zero |
| `Double` | YAML float scalar | MUST resolve as float under the Core Schema |

Examples:

```yaml
MustBePresent: true
ReturnPolicyIdList: false
MaxDelegationDepth: 3
Value: 3.14159
Description: This rule permits read access to public content.
```

> A value of ACAL type `Double` MUST use a lexical form that YAML resolves

Reviewer: What is the reason for this restriction?

XACML has always allowed integers as double values without ambiguity.

Author: I spent some time researching this with the bots across all 3 specs and came up with this:

The strongest rationale is not that ACAL itself needs lexical distinction in the abstract model. It is that YACAL and JACAL chose to let native scalar syntax carry part of the typing burden in the concrete representation.

In XML/XACML, the literal is always text, so `3` and `3.0` are both just character data until the surrounding `DataType` or expression context interprets them. In YAML and JSON, that is no longer true: the parser first turns the token into a native scalar kind. That is exactly what acal-core-yaml-v1.0.md#L453 and acal-core-yaml-v1.0.md#L646 are leaning on, and it is also what acal-core-json-v1.0.md#L523 does for JACAL.

So the rationale for requiring a double to use a float-like lexical form is:

- It preserves the “native scalar maps to ACAL primitive” rule. If `3` were allowed to stand for either integer or double in YAML/JSON, then native scalar form would no longer be enough to determine the implicit ACAL type.
- It keeps untyped or weakly typed `ValueType` positions deterministic. `Value: 3` can be read as integer, `Value: 3.0` as double, without needing extra contextual reasoning.
- It makes generic tooling more reliable. Schema validators, serializers, diff tools, and format translators can follow simple syntax-based rules instead of ACAL-specific semantic inference.
- It improves round-tripping. If an implementation reads a native number and later writes it back, the intended ACAL type is less likely to drift.
- It reduces implementation variance. Your skepticism is well founded here: many implementers will use host-language defaults, and host languages vary a lot in how they represent numbers. A spec-level lexical rule narrows that variability.

Counterpoint: Semantically, ACAL context can often disambiguate, so the requirement is not strictly necessary for correctness in every case. It is more of a concrete-syntax discipline than an abstract-model necessity. In other words, the rule is mainly about predictability, interoperability, and minimizing parser-dependent behavior.

That tradeoff is even sharper for JACAL. JSON has only one numeric syntax category, and many JSON parsers erase the distinction between `3` and `3.0` as soon as they parse. So if JACAL wants implicit typing from native numbers, it needs either:
1. a lexical convention like this, or
2. more reliance on explicit `DataType` / surrounding context.

So the best defense of the requirement is: it is not there because ACAL’s semantics demand it; it is there because YAML/JSON concrete syntaxes otherwise make implicit typing *less portable and more implementation-dependent than XML*.

Reviewer: > JSON has only one numeric syntax category, and many JSON parsers erase the distinction between `3` and `3.0` as soon as they parse.

That seems more like a reason why integers should be allowed for double values. If the JSON tooling converts `3.0` to `3` then ACAL-level validation is going to reject the value because it isn't a floating point number. If an implementation tries to compensate by accepting integers anyway then it will also accept values that it should be rejecting.

> So if JACAL wants implicit typing from native numbers, it needs either:
> 1.   a lexical convention like this, or
> 2.   more reliance on explicit DataType / surrounding context.

If the JSON parser is obscuring the lexical convention then doesn't that necessitate 2?

Author: `If the JSON parser is obscuring the lexical convention then doesn't that necessitate 2?`

That seems logical.

How do you suggest we resolve it?

Reviewer: > > If the JSON parser is obscuring the lexical convention then doesn't that necessitate 2?
> 
> That seems logical.
> 
> How do you suggest we resolve it?

There isn't a nice answer. Either we accept that some JSON parsers shouldn't be used because they can't be conformant, or we don't use the lexical difference between integers and floating point numbers to distinguish between integer and double values. I'm more inclined to the second option. Type inference for function arguments will avoid the need to have an explicit DataType property in most cases.

Reviewer 2: Actually, altough the JSON spec (RFC 8259) does not distinguish integers from floats, the [JSON Schema spec](https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-validation#name-type) does **define an integer type** (*any number with a zero fractional part*) in section 6.1.1 (btw we are using that type in the JACAL schema), so we may refer to that. In case that's not explicit enough, we may even refer to the[ official test suite for the JSON schema version 2020-12](https://github.com/json-schema-org/JSON-Schema-Test-Suite/blob/23.2.0/tests/draft2020-12/type.json) that we are using in JACAL, that gives valid and invalid examples of JSON integers (according to JSON Schema). 

So my suggestion for JACAL, when the input value is a JSON number:
1. If the (ACAL) `DataType` is defined - either explicitly or inferred from context - as...
    a. **Integer** --> the value SHALL be an integer according to the aforementioned JSON schema's integer type definition, else invalid. (Even if an implementation uses a naive (not JSON-schema-compliant) JSON parser that still handles it as float/double, the ACAL-level validator/parser shall map it to an ACAL integer regardless, by checking it has a zero fractional part.) 
   b. **Double** --> handle it as an ACAL Double as usual.
   c. **Anything else** --> invalid value!
5. Else (the `DataType` is undefined!):
    a. If the value matches the aforementioned JSON schema's integer type definition (zero fractional part), handle it as ACAL Integer (it's always good to use the more optimal representation when we can).
    b. Else handle it as ACAL Double.

Note: for YACAL, it's easier. In the case when the ACAL DataType is undefined, we just refer to type resolution rules defined in YAML 1.2.2 section 10.2.2 to know whether it's a YAML int or float, then map YAML int to ACAL Integer and YAML float to ACAL Double.

Reviewer: > So my suggestion for JACAL, when the input value is a JSON number:
> 
>     1. If the (ACAL) `DataType` is defined - either explicitly or inferred from context - as...
>        a. **Integer** --> the value SHALL be an integer according to the aforementioned JSON schema's integer type definition, else invalid.

Which means 1 and 2.0 are valid integer values. Unusual, but okay.

> (Even if an implementation uses a naive (not JSON-schema-compliant) JSON parser that still handles it as float/double, the ACAL-level validator/parser shall map it to an ACAL integer regardless, by checking it has a zero fractional part.)
>        b. **Double** --> handle it as an ACAL Double as usual.

Given JSON tooling that converts numbers with zero fractional parts to integers the safest thing to do is accept any JSON number, so 1, 2.0 and 2.1 are valid double values.

>        c. **Anything else** --> invalid value!
> 
>     2. Else (the `DataType` is undefined!):
>        a. If the value matches the aforementioned JSON schema's integer type definition (zero fractional part), handle it as ACAL Integer (it's always good to use the more optimal representation when we can).
>        b. Else handle it as ACAL Double.

An ACAL double value with a zero/absent fractional part and no explicit or inferred data type would have to be outlawed in JACAL because it will be mistaken for an integer. An explicit data type is required.

Reviewer 2: >Given JSON tooling that converts numbers with zero fractional parts to integers the safest thing to do is accept any JSON number, so 1, 2.0 and 2.1 are valid double values.

Not sure I get your point. Case 1.b is when the `DataType` is explicitly set to Double (DataType = `urn:oasis:names:tc:acal:1.0:data-type:double` (or some short ID) ), so yes, the JSON number has to be mapped to an ACAL Double always.

> An ACAL double value with a zero/absent fractional part and no explicit or inferred data type would have to be outlawed in JACAL because it will be mistaken for an integer. An explicit data type is required.

When you say "ACAL double", you have already decided the ACAL type of the JSON number to be Double, but based on which rules? My point here (case 2) is to define these default type mapping/inference rules that decide when an input JSON number (e.g. in Request) is mapped to an ACAL Integer and when it is mapped to an ACAL Double (in absence of explicit/context-inferred `DataType`), so before you can even say "this is an ACAL Double".  The JSON Profile of XACML 3.0 had such rules in Table 1 already, also YAML 1.2 §10.2.2 has similar rules for mapping a scalar to an int or float, then it's easy to map the former to ACAL Integer and the latter to Double).  Always choosing the more optimal type by default. 
If someone wants to force the Double type, they can always use an explicit DataType of course (cf. Case 1).

Author: `When you say "ACAL double", you have already decided the ACAL type of the JSON number to be Double, but based on which rules?`

I think that the link to the “AI conversation” I posted in chat offers a high level solution that addresses this in a way that is similar to what you are suggesting: ACAL defines the datatype and then each language is responsible for describing how it is interpreted/enforced in the local context.

It seems to me that if we build upon that using some of Steven’s suggestions re: tabular representation that it would provide a clear and unambiguous path for handing data types consistently. I’d be happy to pursue it further if there is interest.

Reviewer: > > Given JSON tooling that converts numbers with zero fractional parts to integers the safest thing to do is accept any JSON number, so 1, 2.0 and 2.1 are valid double values.
> 
> Not sure I get your point. Case 1.b is when the `DataType` is explicitly set to Double (DataType = `urn:oasis:names:tc:acal:1.0:data-type:double` (or some short ID) ), so yes, the JSON number has to be mapped to an ACAL Double always.

I haven't yet had a chance to thoroughly read the JACAL spec so I might be missing something. On a quick scan it isn't obvious to me that either of these is definitively legal:

```json
{
	"DataType":"double",
	"Value":2.0
}
```
```json
{
	"DataType":"double",
	"Value":1
}
```
The first case necessarily has to be allowed. It would be prudent to allow the second case also.

Separately, I have been trying to work out what is allowed in YACAL.
Consider this:
```
DataType: double
Value: 1
```

In YACAL Section 5.4.4 it says:
> 5. If a fixed-datatype primitive value is accompanied by an explicit DataType, that DataType MUST match the fixed data type of the scalar and SHOULD be omitted.

The value 1 is (probably; it needs to be clarified) a fixed-datatype primitive integer value and the double data type violates the MUST. At least `2.0` seems to be a floating point number.

> > An ACAL double value with a zero/absent fractional part and no explicit or inferred data type would have to be outlawed in JACAL because it will be mistaken for an integer. An explicit data type is required.
> 
> When you say "ACAL double", you have already decided the ACAL type of the JSON number to be Double, but based on which rules?

Based on the rule of "I'm a policy writer writing a JACAL policy and I want to use the double value 1.0 as a literal value and not have it mistaken for an integer". The JSON numbers 1 and 1.0 are not legal _double_ values in JACAL _in the absence of an explicit or implied double data type_ because they are taken to be integers.

   sequence.
6. If an ACAL property has a default value, that property MAY be
   omitted and the ACAL default semantics apply.  If the property is
   present, its value MUST conform to the ACAL type and any default
   constraints.
7. A YAML mapping used for a complex ACAL type MUST NOT contain duplicate
   property keys.

Examples:

```yaml
ShortIdSetReference:
  - "urn:oasis:names:tc:acal:1.0:core:identifiers"
  - "urn:example:yacal:ids:local"

Expression:
  - Value: read
  - Value: write
```

#### 5.4.3 Null and Omission

The YAML scalars `null`, `Null`, `NULL` and `~` are not valid YACAL values and MUST NOT be used as a generic
stand-in for absence. Similarly, a property with undefined value (e.g. `myProperty: # Empty`) is forbidden in YACAL.

To omit an optional property, the property MUST simply be absent from
the mapping.  An omitted property is not equivalent to a present
property whose value is YAML `null`.

#### 5.4.4 ValueType Mapping Rules

The ACAL `ValueType` and its literal subtypes are mapped specially
because YAML provides native scalar forms.

`ValueType` is abstract.  In YACAL, its concrete representations follow
the same conceptual split as ACAL:

> 1. fixed-datatype primitive values

Reviewer: Which are the fixed-datatype primitive values? Are they just the boolean, integer and double types mentioned below?

`DataType` because the surrounding `ParameterType` already fixes the
value's `DataType`.  If both are present, they MUST agree.

#### 5.6.6 PolicyReferenceType

```yaml
PolicyReference:
  Id: "urn:example:yacal:policy:audit-logging"
  Version: "2.*"
  Expression:
    - Value: "high"
    - Value: 90
```

Each item in `Expression` corresponds positionally to a `Parameter`
definition in the referenced policy.  Where the referenced parameter
fixes the `DataType`, a nested `ValueType` SHOULD omit `DataType`; if
present, it MUST agree.

#### 5.6.7 PolicyIssuer

The `PolicyIssuer` property of a `PolicyType` value uses the direct
mapping of `EntityType` from [Section 5.4.13](#5413-entitytype-mapping).

Example:

```yaml
PolicyIssuer:
  Attribute:
    - AttributeId: "urn:example:yacal:issuer:id"
      Value:
        - "urn:example:authority:medical-board"
    - AttributeId: "urn:example:yacal:issuer:name"
      Value:
        - "Regional Medical Board"
```

If `PolicyIssuer` includes structured body content, that content follows
the `ContentType` rules in [Section 5.4.11](#5411-contenttype-mapping).

#### 5.6.8 PolicyPatternMatchReference

> For conformance-table alignment with the peer representations, YACAL

Reviewer: PolicyPatternMatchReference is an element name only intended to be used in the SAML profile revision. Policies always use PolicyReference to reference policies regardless of whether the reference has parameters. A mapping for PatternMatchIdReferenceType is still required because PolicyReferenceType is derived from it.

The example is bogus for YACAL.

3. support for mandatory and optional YACAL syntax objects derived from
   ACAL core

Some ACAL objects and features are optional to implement, either because
they are optional in ACAL core or because they are only required when
supporting specific ACAL profiles or deployment scenarios.  If an
implementation claims support for such an optional feature, it MUST
implement the corresponding YACAL syntax, typing, and constraint rules
consistently.

This specification is accompanied by normative machine-readable
artifacts for core YACAL structure, core constraints, core short
identifiers, and selected ACAL profiles.  These artifacts support
consistent implementation and validation of YACAL, but they do not
change the peer relationship between YACAL and the XML and JSON ACAL
representations.

### 7.2 Conformance Categories

For the purposes of this specification:

- **M** means mandatory-to-implement for a processor claiming core YACAL
  conformance
- **O** means optional-to-implement

An implementation MUST follow [Section 5](#5-syntax-normative) where it
applies to implemented items in the following tables.

### 7.3 Conformance Tables

#### 7.3.1 Syntax Objects

> The implementation MUST support those YACAL syntax objects marked `M`.

Reviewer: This is duplicating the conformance table in the ACAL core. The YACAL document should just reference the table in the core.

Author: I looked into this a bit and I am not sure what you mean. It appears that XACML, JACAL and YACAL have (near) matching conformance tables--none of which matches what is in the ACAL core specification. Am I looking at the wrong table?

[ConfTables.pdf](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/26662581/ConfTables.pdf)

Reviewer: I didn't notice that the table in the core was referring to object types whereas the table in YACAL was using object names. However, we are still attempting to convey essentially the same conformance information across four specifications which would be better to say just once. The tables for JACAL, XACML and YACAL should be identical, but are not, which is a demonstration of why repeating normative requirements across specifications is an anti-pattern.

Optional object types correlate with optional object names, but since the core is organized by object types rather than property names and since YACAL follows by defining mappings for the object types it makes more sense to me to specify conformance by object type rather than object name.

"object name" doesn't seem to have any meaning in YAML. It probably should be "key".

Author: In that case it seems like the next step is to update the ACAL tables to reflect the definitive information that each downstream specs are currently attempting to specify, then update each of the downstream specs to reference the updated ACAL tables (with localizations, such as “key” naming where applicaable).

If that is how we wish to proceed I’ll update YACAL once the ACAL change has been made (and will leave XACML and JACAL updates to you and Cyril accordingly).

Reviewer: I have updated the object type conformance table in the ACAL core and added an extra column indicating the properties that use each type (where applicable). Some of the types/properties in the source tables were related to simple types rather than object types so I took them out.
